Hadrian's Villa is a vast area of land with many pools, baths, fountains and classical Greek and Roman architecture
set in what would have been a mixture of landscaped gardens, wilderness areas and cultivated farmlands.

The buildings are constructed in travertine, brick, lime, pozzolana, and tufa. The complex contains over 30 buildings,
covering at least a square kilometre (250 acres, an area larger than the city of Pompeii), of which much is still unexcavated.
Villas were typically sited on hilltops, but with its fountains, pools and gardens, Hadrian's villa required abundant sources water,
which was supplied by aqueducts feeding Rome, including the Aqua Anio Vetus, Aqua Anio Novus, Aqua Marcia, and Aqua Claudia. To avail 
themselves of those sources, the villa had to be located on land lower than the aqueduct.[1]
The ruins of Hadrian's Villa in their present state

The complex of the villa contains many structures from different cultures. For example, the villa has a small Nile river
running through it that relates back to the Egyptian Nile river. Also, the villa had Poikilos, which are Greek figures that
were seen in ancient Greece. Within all the structures in the villa, there is also a grotto called Hades. All these structures
relate back to where Emperor Hadrian visited during his reign.

The architecture goes beyond the mere naming of its structures naming after places and monuments seen by Hadrian on
his extensive travels across the empire. Certain buildings clearly attempt to recreate specific features of landscapes
or architecture that had personal significance for the emperor. Thus, the area known as the Canopus, named after the Egyptian 
city where Antinous drowned, features a long, stately reflecting pool, representing the Nile, which was lined with copies of
famous works of sculpture including the caryatids of the Erechtheion, a statue depicting the Egyptian dwarf and fertility god,
Bes and a crocodile. The Pecile is modeled after the Stoa Poikile in Athens, a city favored by Hadrian. The structures freely mix traditional
Greek and innovative Roman elements. The island enclosure (known as the Maritime Theatre) uses the classical Ionic order, albeit in a novel way; the triclinium
of the so-called Piazza d’Oro and the Serapeum were covered with Roman segmented concrete domes, probably designed by Hadrian himself.

Hadrian's Pecile located inside the Villa was a huge garden surrounded by a swimming pool and an arcade. The pool's dimensions measure
232 by 97 metres (761 by 318 ft). Originally, the pool was surrounded by four walls with colonnaded interior. These columns helped to support 
the roof. In the center of the quadriportico was a large rectangular pool. The four walls create a peaceful solitude for Hadrian and guests.

One structure in the villa is the so-called "Maritime Theatre". It consists of a round portico with a barrel vault supported by pillars. Inside
the portico was a ring-shaped pool with a central island. The large circular enclosure 40 metres (130 ft) in diameter has an entrance to the north.
Inside the outer wall and surrounding the moat are a ring of unfluted ionic columns. The Maritime Theater includes a lounge, a library, heated baths,
three suites with heated floors, washbasin, an art gallery, and a large fountain.[2] During the ancient times, the island was connected to the portico
by two wooden drawbridges. On the island sits a small Roman house complete with an atrium, a library, a triclinium, and small baths. The area was probably
used by the emperor as a retreat from the busy life at the court.

The villa utilizes numerous architectural styles and innovations. The domes of the steam baths have circular holes on the apex to allow steam to
escape. This is reminiscent of the Pantheon, also built by Hadrian. The area has a network of tunnels and were mostly used to transport servants
and goods from one area to another.

In 1998, the remains of what archaeologists claimed to be the monumental tomb of Antinous, or a temple to him, were discovered at 
the Villa.[3] This, however, has subsequently been challenged in a study noting the lack of any direct evidence for a tomb of Antinous,
as well as a previously overlooked patristic source indicating burial in Egypt at Antinoöpolis, and treating the possibility of a sanctuary of
Antinous at Hadrian's Villa as plausible but unproven.[4]
n September 2013, a network of tunnels was investigated, buried deep beneath the villa – these were probably service routes for staff so that
the idyllic nature of the landscape might remain undisturbed. The site housed several thousand people including staff, visitors, servants and
slaves. Although much major activity would have been engaged in during Hadrian's absence on tours of inspection of the provinces a great many
people (and animals) must have been moving about the Tivoli site on a daily basis. The almost constant building activity on top of basic gardening
and domestic activities probably led to subterranean routes being resorted to.

The villa itself has been described as an architectural masterpiece. A team of caving specialists has discovered that it is even more
impressive than previously thought.[5] 
