Yarn history:

Natural fibers—cotton, flax, silk, and wool—represent the major fibers available to ancient civilizations.
The earliest known samples of yarn and fabric of any kind were found near Robenhausen, Switzerland, where bundles of flax fibers
and yarns and fragments of plain-weave linen fabric, were estimated to be about 7,000 years old.

Cotton has also been cultivated and used to make fabrics for at least 7,000 years. It may have existed in Egypt as early as
12,000 B.C. Fragments of cotton fabrics have been found by archeologists in Mexico (from 3500 B.C.)., in India (3000 B.C.), 
in Peru (2500 B.C.), and in the southwestern United States (500 B.C.). Cotton did not achieve commercial importance in Europe
until after the colonization of the New World. Silk culture remained a specialty of the Chinese from its beginnings (2600 B.C.)
until the sixth century, when silkworms were first raised in the Byzantine Empire.

Until about 1300, yarn was spun on the spindle and whorl. A spindle is a rounded stick with tapered ends to which the fibers
are attached and twisted; a whorl is a weight attached to the spindle that acts
as a flywheel to keep the spindle rotating. The fibers were pulled by hand from a bundle of
carded fibers tied to a stick called a distaff. In hand carding, fibers are placed between two boards
covered with leather, through which protrude fine wire hooks that catch the fibers as one board is pulled gently across the other.

The spindle, which hangs from the fibers, twists the fibers as it rotates downward, and 
spins a length of yarn as it pulls away from the fiber bundle. When the spindle reaches the
floor, the spinner winds the yarn around the spindle to secure it and then starts the process again. 
This is continued until all of the fiber is spun or until the spindle is full.

A major improvement was the spinning wheel, invented in India between 500 and 1000 A.D. and first
used in Europe during the Middle Ages. A horizontally mounted spindle is connected to a large, hand-driven wheel
by a circular band. The distaff is mounted at one end of the spinning wheel and the fiber is fed by hand to the
spindle, which turns as the wheel turns. A component called the flyer twists the thread just before it is wound 
on a bobbin. The spindle and bobbin are attached to the wheel by separate parts, so that the bobbin turns more slowly
than does the spindle. Thus, thread can be twisted and wound at the same time. About 150 years later, the Saxon wheel
was introduced. Operated by a foot pedal, the Saxon wheel allowed both hands the freedom to work the fibers.

A number of developments during the eighteenth century further mechanized the spinning process. In 1733, the flying shuttle 
was invented by John Kay, followed by Hargreaves’ spinning jenny in 1766. The jenny featured a series of spindles set in a row,
enabling one operator to produce large quantities of yarn. Several years later Richard Arkwright patented the spinning frame, a machine
that used a series of rotating rollers to draw out the fibers. A decade later Samule Cromptons’ mule machine was invented, which could
spin any type of yarn in one continuous operation.

The ring frame was invented in 1828 by the American John Thorp and is still widely used today. This system involves hundreds of
spindles mounted vertically inside a metal ring. Many natural fibers are now spun by the open-end system, where the fibers are drawn
by air into a rapidly rotating cup and pulled out on the other side as a finished yarn.
Raw Materials:

About 15 different types of fibers are used to make yarn. These fibers fall into two categories,
natural and synthetic. Natural fibers are those that are obtained from a plant or an animal and are mainly
used in weaving textiles. The most abundant and commonly used plant fiber is cotton, gathered from the cotton
boil or seed pod when it is mature. In fact, cotton is the best-selling fiber in America, outselling all synthetic fibers combined.

Fibers taken from the plant leaf or stern are generally used for rope. Other plant fibers include acetate (made from wood pulp or
cotton linters) and linen, made from flax, a vegetable fiber. Animal fibers include wool, made from sheep hair, and mohair, made from
angora goats and rabbits. Silk is a protein extruded in long, continuous strands by the silkworm as it weaves its cocoon.

Synthetic fibers are made by forcing a thick solution of polymerized chemicals through spinneret nozzles and hardening the resulting
filament in a chemical bath. These include acrylic, nylon, polyester, polyolefin, rayon, spandex, and triacetate. Some of these fibers
have similar characteristics to the natural fibers without the shrinkage problems. Other fibers have special properties for specific
applications. For instance, spandex can be stretched over 500% without breaking.
The Manufacturing Process:

There are three major spinning processes: cotton, worsted or long-staple, or wool. Synthetic staple fibers can be made
with any of these processes. Since more yarn is produced with the cotton process than the other two, its manufacture is described below.
Preparing the fibers:

Fibers are shipped in bales, which are opened by hand or machine. Natural fibers may require cleaning, whereas synthetic fibers
only require separating. The picker loosens and separates the lumps of fiber and also cleans the fiber if necessary. Blending of 
different staple fibers may be required for certain applications. Blending may be done during formation of the lap, during carding,
or during drawing out. Quantities of each fiber are measured carefully and their proportions are consistently maintained.
Carding:

The carding machine is set with hundreds of fine wires that separate the fibers and pull them into somewhat parallel form. A thin web
of fiber is formed, and as it moves along, it passes through a funnel-shaped device that produces a ropelike strand of parallel fibers.
Blending can take place by joining laps of different fibers.
Combing:

When a smoother, finer yarn is required, fibers are subjected to a further paralleling method. A comblike device arranges fibers
into parallel form, with short fibers falling out of the strand.
Drawing out:

After carding or combing, the fiber mass is referred to as the sliver. Several slivers are combined before this process.
A series of rollers rotating at different rates of speed elongate the sliver into a single more uniform strand that is given
a small amount of twist and fed into large cans. Carded slivers are drawn twice after carding. Combed slivers are drawn once
before combing and twice more after combing.
Twisting:

The sliver is fed through a machine called the roving frame, where the strands of fiber are further elongated
and given additional twist. These strands are called the roving.
Spinning:

The predominant commercial systems of yarn formation are ring spinning and open-end spinning. In ring spinning,
the roving is fed from the spool through rollers. These rollers elongate the roving, which passes through the eyelet,
moving down and through the traveler. The traveler moves freely around the stationary ring at 4,000 to 12,000 revolutions per minute
. The spindle turns the bobbin at a constant speed. This turning of the bobbin and the movement of the traveler twists
and winds the yarn in one operation.

Open-end spinning omits the roving step. Instead, a sliver of fibers is fed into the spinner by a stream of air.
The sliver is delivered to a rotary beater that separates the fibers into a thin stream that is carried into
the rotor by a current of air through a tube or duct and is deposited in a V-shaped groove along the sides of the rotor.
As the rotor turns, twist is produced. A constant stream of new fibers enters the rotor, is distributed in the groove,
and is removed at the end of the formed yarn.
The Future:

Spinning systems and yarn manufacturing machinery will continue to become more automated and will be integrated as part of a manufacturing
unit rather than as a separate process. Spinning machines have already been developed that combine carding and drawing functions. Production 
rates will increase by orders of magnitude as machines become available with even more spindles. Robot-controlled equipment will become standard.

Domestic yarn producers will continue to be threatened by competition from Asian countries, as these countries continue to buy the
latest textile machinery technology. Higher domestic material prices will not help, since the cost of the raw material can represent up
to 73% of the total cost of producing the yarn. U.S. yarn producers will continue to form alliances with their customers and customers’ 
customers to remain competitive. The textile industry is also forming unique partnerships. The American Textile Partnership is a collaborative
research and development program among industry, government, and academia aimed at strengthening the competitiveness of the U.S. industry.
