France has had a rich history with the development of various forms of inns and eateries, eventually to form many of the
now-ubiquitous elements of the modern restaurant.

As far back as the thirteenth century, inns served a variety of food — bread, cheese, bacon,
roasts, usually eaten at a common table. Parisians could buy what was essentially take-out food from rôtisseurs,
who prepared roasted meat dishes, and pastry-cooks, who could prepare meat pies and often more elaborate dishes. Municipal
statutes stated that the official prices per item were to be posted at the entrance; this was the first official mention
of menus.[27]

Taverns also served food, as did cabarets. A cabaret, however, unlike a tavern, served food at tables with
tablecloths, provided drinks with the meal, and charged by the customers' choice of dish, rather than by the pot.[28]
Cabarets were reputed to serve better food than taverns and a few, such as the Petit Maure, became well-known. A few
cabarets had musicians or singing, but most, until the late 19th century, were simply convivial eating places.[29][28]

The first café opened in Paris in 1672 at the Saint-Germain fair. By 1723 there were nearly four hundred cafés in Paris,
but their menu was limited to simpler dishes or confectionaries, such as coffee, tea, chocolate, ice creams, pastries,
and liqueurs.[28]

At the end of the 16th century, the guild of cook-caterers (later known as "traiteurs") was given its own legal status. 
The traiteurs dominated sophisticated food service, delivering or preparing meals for the wealthy at their residences.
Taverns and cabarets were limited to serving little more than roast or grilled meats. Towards the end of the seventeenth
century, both inns and then traiteurs began to offer "host's tables" (tables d'hôte), where one paid a set price to sit
at a large table with other guests and eat a fixed menu meal.[29]

The earliest modern-format "restaurants" to use that name in Paris were the establishments which served bouillon,
a broth made of meat and egg which was said to restore health and vigor. The first restaurant of this kind opened in
1765 or 1766 by Mathurin Roze de Chantoiseau on rue des Poulies, now part of the Rue de Louvre.[30] The name of the owner
is sometimes given as Boulanger.[31] Unlike earlier eating places, it was elegantly decorated, and besides meat broth
offered a menu of several other "restorative" dishes, including macaroni. Chantoiseau and other chefs took the title
"traiteurs-restaurateurs".[32]

In June 1786 the Provost of Paris issued a decree giving the new kind of eating establishment official status, 
authorizing restaurateurs to receive clients and to offer them meals until eleven in the evening in winter and 
midnight in summer.[32] Ambitious cooks from noble households began to open more elaborate eating places. The first
luxury restaurant in Paris, the Taverne Anglaise, was opened at the Palais-Royal at the beginning of 1786, shortly before
the French Revolution, by Antoine Beauvilliers, the former chef of the Count of Provence, It had mahogany tables, linen tablecloths,
chandeliers, well-dressed and trained waiters, a long wine list and an extensive menu of elaborately prepared and presented dishes.[32]

The French Revolution caused a mass emigration of nobles, and many of their cook chose to open restaurants.[33] 
One restaurant was started in 1791 by Méot, the former chef of the Duke of Orleans, which offered a wine list with
twenty-two choices of red wine and twenty-seven of white wine. By the end of the century there were a collection of
luxury restaurants at the Grand-Palais: Huré, the Couvert espagnol; Février; the Grotte flamande; Véry, Masse and the
Café de Chartres (still open, now Le Grand Vefour)[32]

In the early 19th century traiteurs and restaurateurs, became known simply as "restaurateurs". The use of the term
"restaurant" for the establishment itself only became common in the nineteenth century).

The first restaurant guide, called Almanach des Gourmandes, written by Grimod de La Reyniére, was published
in 1804. During the French Restoration period, the most celebrated restaurant was the Rocher de Cancale, frequented
by the characters of Balzac. In the middle of the century, Balzac's characters moved to the Cafe Anglais, which in 1867
also hosted the famous Three Emperors Dinner hosted by Napoleon III in honor of Tsar Alexander II, Kaiser Wilhelm I
and Otto von Bismarck during the Exposition Universelle in 1867[34] Other restaurants that occupy a place in French
history and literature include Maxim's and Fouquet's. The restaurant of Hotel Ritz Paris, opened in 1898, was made famous
by its chef, Auguste Escoffier. The 19th century also saw the appearance of new kinds of more modest restaurants, including
the bistrot. The brasserie featured beer and was made popular during the 1867 Paris Exposition.[32] 
